prosecutors from the international
criminal court are reportedly
interviewing staff from two hospitals in
the Gaza Strip that's after the
discovery of mass Graves on the grounds
of the two facilities hundreds of bodies
were recovered from three Mass Graves on
the premises of the NASA Hospital in Han
Unis this month and the remains of
dozens more people were exhumed at alifa
hospital in Gaza City after an Israeli
Siege of the facility both hospitals
were left badly damaged
and out of service after Israeli troops
withdrew let's go straight to Al jaer
Sark abum who's in Rafa forest in
southern Gaza so tar what more have you
found out about these ICC investigators
interviewing uh staff at Nasa hospital
and alifa Hospital who were they talking
to and about what
precisely well precisely FY uh the
persecutors of the international
criminal court have been speaking to a
number of pal Medics who have been
working in a shifa hospital in the north
and even in nasar hospital in kanun in
the south after the Israeli withdrawal
they have been talking about possible
crimes committed by the Israeli military
during the existence inside the medical
facility but yet the identities of those
Medics is still unknown for security
concerns and security reasons as the
international uh criminal uh Courts
office have been saying that they did
not provide any proper comment about the
operational procedures and
investigations being made with these
eyewitnesses in order to guarantee the
full protection and we have been clearly
remember what was going on in such
hospitals in terms of the mass Graves
being discovered were hundreds of bodies
found de composed and they have been
found also uh dug in have been buried in
in deeper in sand with bile of waste and
sand have been throwing over such bodies
but yet the Israeli side have been
saying that they have no longer uh let's
say care about what the international
court of justice might take in terms of
actions against Israeli soldiers as the
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu says that he will tries to he
will try to afford the full protection
for the Israeli soldiers under his own
leadership but it's absolutely
terrifying as what we do know is that
we've been hearing from the Gaza civil
defense Crews saying that there are
still at least 10,000 Palestinians
messing under the rule of the destroyed
house houses in multiple areas across
the territory as the the accumulation of
these bodies especially when the during
the onset of the summer season had
contributed to increase the spread of
diseases and even epidemics as till now
there are struggling in order to recover
such injuries and victims from under the
rubble of the destroyed houses tar thank
you very much for the update that's Al
jaer is tar abaz reporting their live
from Rafa well let's discuss this
further now with Jeffrey nice who's a
human rights Barrister who led the
prosecution of Slobodan milosovic at the
international criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia he's joining us from
Canterbury thank you so much for your
time uh Mr Nice so we heard that Gaza
Hospital staff questioned by
investigators of the
ICC what does this suggest you what
happens next in the process and what's
likely to be the outcome of these
investigations number of questions
rolled into one on the last one very
difficult to answer likely outome always
bit uncertain but this is I think
interesting and good news going in
sequence and keeping a cool head about
things examination either directly or
through the testimony of others of what
may be a crime site is extremely
important and potentially very valuable
in evidence terms we may have discussed
this before but how bodies are found in
a mass grave whether they're all killed
in the same way whether their hands
would hied behind their back whether
they' being tortured beforehand or not
is itself going to show simply as step
one whether a crime may have been
committed there's other ways in which it
may be shown that a crime has been
committed simply by the number of people
killed who are Innocent by what's shown
of the individuals looking at their
clothing or their property and so on and
so forth so you look at the scene and
you decide if you can whether there's
evidence there of a crime being
committed once you reach the position
position that there is such evidence you
may seek you may find some surviving
eyewitness to what happened and you take
account of that what that eyewitness
says if that eyewitness points
to Commission of the crime by the
Israeli Defense Force or any part of it
you need to know first whether uh the
particular unit is identified doesn't
matter necessarily if not but you work
your way steadily up until reach as high
as you can get but what you may hear
from some is skepticism about the
possibility of ever drawing a link
between the crime at the bottom not the
crime where it happens and links rising
in the chain and what you then have to
take into account is the
following properly constructed um
military forces armies such as the IDF
right have a chain of command from the
top working down and you must reasonably
assume that that chain is in place and
therefore you can demand information
from Israel if it doesn't provide it
voluntarily of if you reach the position
of knowing that it's been something
that's been committed by a military
group demanding to know who the group is
and working out from there how the chain
of command goes up if you look back it's
it may always be said that oh this was a
rogue a rogue unit right and there have
been Rogue units in in the Vietnam there
was a very famous Logue unit of
mili but it sounds as though Netanyahu
is standing by his men uhhuh if he's
standing by his men that may say the
chain of command was intact okay now as
this is happening uh these uh
investigators are talking to staff at
these two hospitals in Gaza uh Mr Nice
there have all also been many reports in
Israeli media in recent days that the
ICC is investigating Israeli actions not
just in Gaza but also in the occupied
West Bank and that there could be arrest
warrants issued for uh Israeli and uh
Hamas officials would that be part of
the same case as the mass graves in Gaza
or a separate case uh would there be a
link between the
two one assumes it would be part of the
same overall case and indeed it has even
been suggested that the overall case
that might be raised against the state
of Israel could go back to and include
what happened as long ago as 2014 when
jurisdiction was first granted to the
international criminal court so uh
although you can't be sure what we're
concerned about here obviously is the
overall driving mental state of the
leadership of the state of Israel's
Defense Force yeah um and that means
what is the mental state of the
intention if you like not quite the same
meaning but the intention of the Israeli
leadership military and political right
it is that if anything which is going to
join things together okay even if for
example at a trial they would have to be
separated out again understood now I
wanted to ask you briefly one last
question before we let you go and get
your your expertise and insight because
you have obviously a great deal of
experience in this there' have also been
reports of some pressure on the ICC not
to issue these arrest warrants now at a
time when there's a great deal of effort
to reach a ceasefire in Gaza the concern
being that this could jeopardize those
efforts would the IC take that into
consideration when and if it issues
these arrest
warrants a most important Point needs a
much longer answer the the short answer
is I'd expected there to be pressure
before and was surprised and happily
surprised to see the announcement of
possible arrest warrants once they've
reached that stage the prosecutor
certainly shouldn't yield now to
pressure from the United States or from
Great Britain or from anywhere else the
the state has been reached in the public
consideration I think that law that
accountability and law should to some
extent out outweigh ra politic and if
there has to be accountability as well
as a settlement of the uh conflict or at
least a ceasefire then let there be
accountability if you don't have
accountability for whatever reason
temporarily good or not so good you open
the door to Future bad actions not just
by the countries presently involved but
by other countries I've said from the
beginning that both Hamas and Israeli
leadership once evidence was available
that each or both had committed such
offenses should be subject to an
accountability process the public
expects that right and governments that
go against it will lose the support of
their people thank you so much for
talking to us thank you for your
expertise Jeffrey nice a former at the
ICC at the international uh criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia yes
sorry a former barister I should say
thank you so much for uh clarifying it
for us Jeffrey nice thank you for your
time make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer